Once around the Garnet
star. So the Garnet star is called Muse
Sephi. It's in the base of the
constellation of Sephiius the King and a
fairly unremarkable looking star at
fourth magnitude. But you can see it
under good lighting conditions with a
nice clear sky. And if you do, you
should notice the color. It appears to
be a deep red color. also exceptionally
good to look at with a small telescope
or a pair of
binoculars. And the name the Garnet Star
comes from a quote from Sir William
Herschel. It's often called Hershel's
Garnet Star. William Hershel noticed
this star and it wasn't in any of the
cataloges at the time, so it had been
missed in the first pass. And he said
about it a fine deep red garnet color
and then such as the periodical star
oeti which is in fact Myra and we'll
look at Myra in another
video. It was numerous astronomers also
gave it names. Piazi the discoverer of
the asteroid series called it Garnet
Cidius which uh I suppose also means the
Garnet star.
A little bit later, 1848, John Russell
Hind realized that Musephi, the Garnet
star, was a variable, swinging by about
a whole magnitude from its uh peak at
3.7 going down to nearly five
sometimes. And uh records of this have
been tracked for a very long time. It's
been recorded continuously since 1881.
So there's a tremendous wealth of data
on
it. Now in terms of distance, things get
a little bit more messy. The Hypocos
satellite measured the parallax angle by
looking across the baseline of the
Earth's orbit to see how much stars had
moved against the background of distant
stars. And it came out with
0.55 millconds.
That's quite a tiny
number. A mill arcsec is a thousandth of
an arcsec which is a 60th of an arc
minute which is a 60th of a degree. So
this is a tiny fraction
indeed. And really Huparos was actually
only accurate to stars that were much
nearer than this, perhaps 500 light
years, because 0.55 millcs gives a
distance of
5,870 light years. So really pushing the
limits of accuracy way beyond what was
reasonable.
Now other surveys including the Gaia
satellite in its data release too have
given lower numbers. So the Garnet star
may be closer than this uh upper limit
of around 6,000 light years. Um but
there those estimates have varied quite
tremendously actually depending on the
basis. I think I trust the guy data but
some of the other data has given it much
uh lower numbers
indeed. Now one thing that we do know
about it is that it's moving and moving
very fast indeed compared to the average
velocity of the stars in its
neighborhood around the galaxy. It's got
an extra 80 km per second
80.7. So it's classed as a runaway star.
And this suggests that it was formed in
a large star cluster and underwent some
sort of gravitational interaction, a
gravitational slingshot in multi-star
systems can eject members. And in fact,
this is what happens to star clusters as
they get older. They have more and more
of these near miss collisions which tend
to hurl stars out of the cluster. Um, so
they boil stars off in all sorts of
random directions with different speeds.
So it seems likely, and this makes sense
because actually, as we will see, this
is a very, very large star, and you tend
to only be able to get large stars
formed out of big clouds of gas and
dust. Um, and they tend to form large
star clusters as a
result. So, what do we know physically
about the Garnet star? Well, it's
actually one of the largest known cool
super
giants. Cool, low temperature on the
surface because it is swelled up to an
absolutely enormous
size. And again, we have some different
estimates for the size.
Some of them have been by directly
trying to measure the apparent size
through an instrument and have given
numbers in the range 19 to 21 mill arc
seconds. So you can see that's vastly
greater than that parallax number. Um so
gives you a a suggestion as to how
difficult using parallax might be. But
um the most recent figures are a bit
lower 14.1 millcs and that was with a
modern intererometer which is able to
actually see the star um at this
tremendous
resolution. We get numbers therefore
that translate to sizes in the range
1,250 to
1,650 times the radius of our sun. This
is enormous. It would go out and engulf
the entire inner solar system. And in
fact, the planet Jupiter, its orbit is
narrower than this star. So if it was
where the sun is, then the inner planets
and the king of the planets, Jupiter,
would be gone. Um, that's absolutely
enormous. When we look at the star, we
don't just see the light and the color.
We can also split it up using a
spectrometer to get an idea of the
detail of which wavelengths are being
emitted and absorbed by gases and
molecules surrounding the star. And this
gives us a temperature reading of uh
around about
3,700 Kelvin. So I've definitely red in
color. The peak of the emission is in
the red part of the spectrum. You can
see that in the chart on the right
there. And you can also see quite a few
absorption bands. These are
characteristic of these cool giant
stars. They have a cool enough
atmosphere that molecules can form and
so you get these characteristic
wavelengths bitten out of the spectrum
like this. And it's fairly stable in
this temperature range. And so it has
been used as the reference star for the
M type uh M2 classification for these
red stars for a long time
now. And as I say, it is a super giant
star up at the top right hand corner of
the Herzbrung Russell diagram there,
right at the very high power output um
and low temperature end of things.
And we think it's about 10 million years
old with a mass around 20 times the mass
of the
sun. Now, these large red giants and red
super giants don't have a particularly
tight grip on their outer layers. um
they're so huge that the force of
gravity at the edge of the star is much
reduced and so they tend to be losing
mass outwards. Very very high solar
winds or stellar winds coming away from
them. And it's been calculated that
every million years about a fifth of a
solar mass is being lost by the Garnet
star.
And so with an age of 10 million years
and losing a fifth in that every million
years, you reckon that it's probably
lost five solar masses and probably
began life with a mass of 25. Very
simple calculation. Um, and seems to fit
with our understanding of the evolution
of these
things. But a 20 to 25 solar mass super
giant 10 million years old is very much
coming to the end of its life. The chart
on the right is for a 25 solar mass
star. So perhaps the Garnet star has now
come down a little bit down to 20 and
will live a little longer than the
numbers in the chart on the right there
as it burns through the different stages
of nuclear fusion turning hydrogen to
helium to carbon and then on through the
other elements down to the point where
it builds an iron core.
And we know that the Garnet star is
already through that hydrogen conversion
stage and is beginning to convert helium
into
carbon. So if those figures were
correct, then it's probably only got
half a million years of helium burning
and it may be partway through that
already. And then really the other
stages don't last any time at all. can
see carbon burning 600 years, neon one
year, oxygen six months, silicon just a
single day. So it's within perhaps 2 or
300 million years of the end of its
life.
Um probably not tomorrow though.
So when it uh starts to get through to
producing these heavier elements, it is
going to go through further evolutionary
stages. It'll probably become a blue
super giant, heating its outer layers up
again, and it then may blow away the
outer remaining hydrogen completely,
exposing the inner helium layer. And at
that stage, we would call it a Wolf Ray
star.
But eventually once
the process runs to completion and the
iron core builds up, things will go
wrong. It will no longer be able to
liberate energy in the core. So the core
will collapse and then a supernova
explosion will occur. The core collapses
down uh dramatically and in this case
probably all the way to a black hole.
And this gravitational collapse frees up
an awful lot of gravitational potential
energy. Probably also creates a storm of
neutrons and and neutrinos and gamma
rays. And those rip out through the star
and blow the outer layers apart in an
enormous explosion.
And depending on exactly the uh way that
this decides to explode, we'll either
see a type 2N, type 2B, or type 1B or 1
C supernova. These are the the
characteristic spectral types from the
helium emissions and the other elements
that are present. None of these would
really see very much by the way of
hydrogen because the unused hydrogen
will have been blown away before that.
and the result will be a black hole. So
it's uh extremely likely that that's
what will
result. Now we talked a little bit about
the magnitude of the star and we talk
about this in many of the videos
relatively modest magnitude 4 to the
eye. But these magnitudes were invented
by the Greeks and they had first
magnitude being the brightest, second,
third, fourth, fifth, sixth being the
faintest that you could see. And these
numbers really were just judged as an
estimate by eye to begin with. And the
stars were classed as first, second,
third, fourth, fifth or sixth in rank
order.
But it turned out when it was being
studied in the 1850s, 1856, Norman
Pogson realized that the difference in
the true actual brightness once we had
technical means of measuring the
brightness to significant precision, he
was able to show that the difference in
brightness between a magnitude 1 and a
magnitude 6 star was in fact a factor of
100. And so he proposed formalizing the
system by taking the five steps that you
have from 1 to two, two to three, 3 to
four, four to five, and five to six.
That's five steps. And if you take the
fifth root of 100, then each step is a
factor of the
2.512 in brightness. And so we can
commonly refer to that as 2 and a half.
And so a magnitude 2 star is 2 and a
half times fainter than a magnitude 1
star. 6.25 and then about 16 about 40
and about
100. And it's fairly easy to remember
those numbers and gives us a good rule
of thumb for the brightness. But you can
get very mathematical about it and uh
start to use these numbers in
sophisticated ways.
One of the features that is often quoted
about a star is its absolute
magnitude. And its absolute magnitude is
a measure of its power output because
it's the apparent magnitude that you
would see if you were standing 10 parexs
away. And a parseek you often hear in
astronomy is 3.26 light years. It's the
distance at which that distance
measuring method, the parallax method
with a baseline of the diameter of the
Earth's orbit will give you an angle of
one arcsec, 1 3,600th of a degree. So
that's one parseek. And for convenience
just to make the numbers uh
plausible absolute magnitude is
calibrated at 10
parex. So we can do some numbers with
this. I happen to know that the absolute
magnitude the power output of the sun on
this scale is plus
4.83. That's relatively dim. Remember,
large numbers in magnitude are faint and
lower numbers are bright. And a Garnet
star, well, that comes in at
7.6. So, it's actually
12.43 magnitude steps brighter than the
sun when viewed from that standard
distance. That would be the ratio
between them. And so we can use the
magnitude rule
2.512 doing it accurately to the power
of the difference in magnitudes 12.3
gives us
93,89. And so the Garnet star power
output is
93,89 times the luminosity of our sun.
And uh so essentially 100,000 times as
powerful. That's a very very substantial
figure. But we can do more. We can also
realize that the inverse square law of
distance and the total power output
allow us to relate the apparent
magnitude that you see and the absolute
magnitude and how far away things are.
This is because the light spreads out
over a sphere and so drops as the
surface area of that sphere which is 4
pi r 2. So you have to have a factor of
1 over 4 pi r 2 into your calculations
and you can infer the distance. Now of
course this does depend on you not
having any intervening clouds of gas and
dust to to reduce the apparent
brightness of your object.
So if we take the Garnet star which has
an apparent magnitude in the star
cataloges of plus
4.08 and an absolute magnitude of
-7.6 that difference is
11.68. We take our magic factor of
2.512 the fifth root of 100 and raise it
to the power of 11.68 and we get 47,014.
So that's the square of the distance
ratio because the distance drops as the
inverse square. So if we take the square
root we get
216.8 and then we just have to multiply
by that standard distance of 32.6 light
years 10 parex and we get
7,068 light years for the distance. Hm.
Well, that's greater than we got when we
were actually using the Hippocos
parallax method, wasn't it? That was
just 6,000 light years. So, this is even
higher. So, what's going on? Well, it's
that intervening
dust. What we haven't allowed for here
is that the apparent magnitude of 4.08
08 probably should have been brighter if
it wasn't being blocked by several
thousand light years worth of
interstellar dust. And so actually
probably we've lost half a magnitude in
our estimates of uh all of this. And if
you plug in plus 3.5 instead of plus4
into the calculation, then your distance
estimate comes out in agreement. And so
actually this is telling us how much
dust there is in the uh intervening
6,000 light years. So it's quite curious
how you can uh use one set of measures
and get a difference and then go back
round and estimate something entirely
different. And indeed, talking of gas
and dust, the Garnet star itself has
quite a substantial shell of gas around
it going out to about 1.3 times its
radius, full of molecules at a
temperature of just over 2,000 Kelvin.
Um, so there's carbon monoxide, water,
uh, silicon monoxide being detected.
Now, we detect these molecules because
they're easy to detect. So we probably
there are an awful lot of others there
that have more complex spectra and are
much harder to figure out. These ones
have nice easy spectra and so are fairly
easy to identify. So there's a lot of
this molecular dust in and
around this
shell. And we think that the dust ring
goes out rather than a completely
spherical shell. it becomes into a
flattened ring of dust going out two to
four stellar radi. Uh contains dust,
contains quite a lot of water. And you
can actually see the two photographs on
the right here. In the top photograph,
the Garnet star is the one near the top
of the picture at the edge of this
huge nebula of dust and gas with a lot
of dirt and dust and material in there.
Um, now that's probably not the result
of it having emitted this material. It's
probably a nebula that it just happens
to be passing nearby. Remember, it's got
that high peculiar velocity, the runaway
star. So, it's probably just hurtling
past this rather than actually being
physically associated with it. But in
the photo at the bottom, you can
certainly see that there is quite a lot
of uh defraction and dust around the
star. So, we're pretty sure about
this. So, the Garnet star, if you get
the chance, do go and have a look at it.
There's a lovely picture here to finish
with. It's such a a lovely color to look
at through a telescope, and no picture
on the screen can really do justice to
it. So that's uh Hershel's Garnet Star.
Thanks very much for listening and I
hope you enjoyed it.